<<add these files to your commit MAX POWER
/>>
<<brief of larger docu to follow
/>>
<<
“The child welfare system, while flawed, is not without hope for change. It may seem as if the problems of oppression and bureaucratic neglect within the system are too large to overcome.” (Child and Adolescent Social Work Journal, Yang, 2016)
Policy: History & Scope
Child Welfare policies include those policies in the United States that are in direct accord to protect the safety and well-being of the child. The history of child welfare in the U.S. is characterized by predominant themes that shift between the preservation of the family and that of the child. It is imperative that we continuously examine existing policies that pertain to the safety of the child and the adopted child. The 1997 Adoption and Safe Families Act (ASFA) records the first time that issues regarding child placement permanency were explicitly slated into legislation. This marked a pivotal moment that forever changed the landscape of child welfare practice. ASFA connected safety and permanency by representing how each factor was imperative in reaching overall child well-being (ASFA, 1997).
ASFA further sought to enforce procedures and guidelines set forth by the Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act of 1988. It sought to improve, strengthen and adapt policies in the best interest of the child within their family (CAPTA, 1988). Though ASFA and CAPTA acknowledge safety and permanence as critical factors to achieving overall child well-being, there is still much work to be done. For example, although these acts recognize preventing physical harm to the child as paramount to policy success, policies like ASFA and CAPTA must strive to uphold the mental and psychological well-being of the child as well (Yang, 2016). 
We acknowledge the growing necessity of policies like those encapsulated in the acts to evolve to meet an ecosystem in a growing online and technologically driven society that effects the child and their families, both adopted and natal, in unique and evolving ways. “Over time, the definition of child maltreatment has changed; typically, maltreatment is often understood as a violation of the parental right to care for and protect a child” (Yang, 2016, p. 513). These policies are central to the safety of the child and the preservation of the child’s human rights.
Further, the Child Welfare League of America (CWLA) defines neglect as the ‘‘failure of parents or other caregiver, for reasons not solely due to poverty, to provide the child with needed, age-appropriate care and supervision appropriate to the child’s development (Child Welfare League of America, 2008). The factors influencing that definition are culturally and contextually bound, and intimately tied to the concept of parental rights (Yang, 2016, p. 513). The research of these factors of parental fitness, however, are clinically augmented towards defending a child from physical harm and less pertinent to those factors central to the cognitive, emotional, and overall mental well-being of the child. As defined by policy, child maltreatment is serious harm (neglect, physical abuse, sexual abuse, and emotional abuse or neglect) caused to children by parents or primary caregivers, such as extended family members or adopted family members (Chapin, p. 439). Emotional abuse is a difficult and oftentimes underscored measure of parental fitness. 
In American culture, the policies that reflect child neglect are largely ill-equipped to match the growing and complex nature of our technologically driven society (Yang, 2012). In order to seek improvements to ASFA and CAPTA, policy advocates must seek to bridge the importance of mental health in child welfare policy to address these needs. This paper examines topics specific to child safety and their parents’ internet use as an indicator of parental fitness.
Values & Interests: Technology and Parental Fitness
Overtime, our relationship with the internet has shifted to match the complexities of the evolving global nature of the world wide web. For example, only now are we beginning to take a medical lens to the long-term effects of internet use (Yang, 2012). Public perception is becoming more critical in its lens to issues of media transparency and the intrinsic links between e-commerce, private internet, and definitions of “safe use”. Furthermore, internet related crimes are abundant and complex (Yang, 2012). 
Perspective on the fitness of parents and adopted or fostering parents is historically understudied in the realm of mental health. For example, as stated in Yang’s research, “Presently, the authors are unaware of any lawsuits, court actions, or other instances where child welfare agencies were found culpable for the educational neglect of children in foster care” (Yang, 2016, p. 516). These limitations are not secluded to the realm of foster care but systemic to the nature of parenting itself within a complex social ecosystem. Additionally, there exist a growing number of parents that are removing their children from the public and private school system and favoring home schooling. This practice further reiterates the importance of examining parental use of technology in the household in respect to mental health and the safety of the child as technology is employed as one of the most foundational tools in education. 
Present Perspective: Technology, Behavior and Mental Health 
The present perspective of this problem is complex. Mental health is a broad and dynamic field. It is only recently that clinical studies have unearthed certain dangers – mood disorders, addictions, compulsions, violent behavior - emanating from the use of technology (Yang, 2012). We live in an increasingly online society, where goods, services, education, entertainment, news, and even healthcare are made readily or more easily accessible to the person via the internet. This incurs in the intrinsic necessity of use that faces American consumers and effects them in their everyday lives. The field of ‘digital psychiatry’ seeks to examine linkage between use and exposure of digital media and information technology to clinical disorders but largely ignores how parental use or endorsement of the use of technology effects children in their households (Internet Safety Strategy, 2018).
Policy & Human Rights: Intersectionality
Parenting is both a private and public entity whereas the values and interests of the familial unit intersect with the specific ecosystems and societal constructs in which it engages. The societal values within parenting and child welfare are largely driven by socioeconomic, healthcare, and cultural ideologies. The intersections and touchpoints of these systems in the U.S. creates a complex and dynamic ecosystem that provides context to the nature and practices of parenting and drive the values by which we evaluate child welfare and enact policy to enforce the safety of the child.  When there is abuse or neglect involved, the private nature is largely relinquished by enforcing these polices. In cases where the parent is suspected of abuse to their child, parental fitness falls under public and institutional scrutiny. 
Measuring parental fitness is a challenging and complicated task. Systemic oppressions such as socioeconomic status of the parent oftentimes undermine the parenting abilities and emotional capabilities of the parent. In custody solutions, for example, court systems traditionally favor keeping the child with the ‘best fit’ parent. These situations often leave ‘unidentified abuses’ to the child and undermine systemic discriminatory practices in the child welfare system (Rosen, 1996). The answers are never easy, nor are the solutions. Societally, the child is seen as having little self determination in his or her own mental well-being let alone significant in determining the mental well-being or fitness of his or her parent. 
Child Welfare policy incorporates the views of a wide range of government and social agency. The responses of institutions in safeguarding the child’s well-being are enacted in law by measures like ASFA and CAPTA. These policies are meant to safeguard the child from physical dangers and abuse from their parents (ASFA, 1997). These policy strategies are continuously informed by a wide range of stakeholders including, inter alia, children’s charities, internet safety NPOs, academic researchers and healthcare organizations. 
Effects of the Problem
Improvements must be made to child welfare policies like ASFA and CAPTA to account for the mental health of the child and to best identify cases of psychological abuses to the child. If mental abuses to the child go undetected, they may result in long term, life debilitating ailments such as clinical depression, suicidal thoughts, and debilitating addictions – both physical and psychological (Yang, 2012). Gaps in the current policies regarding child welfare must be continuously reviewed to meet the rapidly evolving nature of crimes and abuses against children, including physical violence, self-harm, sex trafficking and slavery (CIPA, 2013).
Intersection of Mental Health and Technology
Violence and abuses against children are oftentimes hidden and further exasperated by the systems and institutions that effect the child’s life. Concurrently, there is a dearth of investigatory knowledge and storytelling of the nature of psychological abuses to the child (Cooper, 2005). Certain policies address concerns about children's access to obscene or harmful content over the Internet. “Policies and programs need to be attuned to the ethnic, political, cultural and economic contexts of families’ lives” (Chapin, 2017, p. 462). CAPTA seeks to identify risk factors to a child’s safety. It protects the child from abuse and is the paramount legislation that provides federal funds to states in order to develop reporting systems for investigations of abuse and neglect by involving the federal government in child protective services (Chapin, 2017, p. 445). While there exist monitoring agency and private protections within internet entities that ensure certain safety protocols, its content is largely unregulated and protected by constitutional rights (CIPA, 2013).
Social work has responded to the evolving needs of child welfare by enforcing and amending policies that aim to determine the symptoms of child abuse, encourage permanence planning in adoption cases, and mitigate all forms of abuse, neglect and harm to the child (CAPTA, 1988). In terms of parental fitness, especially in cases where abuse is suspected, it is imperative that child welfare policy reflect and enact those improvement measures, like CIPA, whose prerogative is to match the evolving care needed in our technology driven society. 
Policy Development & Alternative Solutions: Goals for Current Policy and Roadmap
The Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act, also slated as The Child Abuse Prevention, Adoption and Family Services Act of 1988, provides federal funding to States in support of prevention, assessment, investigation, prosecution, and treatment activities within the child welfare domain (CAPTA, 1988). As the nature of parenting is dynamic, policies like CAPTA must be informed by standards like those set forth by newer policies like CIPA. Namely, “Children today still do not have guaranteed basic rights such as the right to not be physically punished in schools and the right to participate in decision making about their own lives” (Chapin, p. 464). For the child, the human right to self-determination, especially within education, extends beyond the educational system and into the home. 
Current Policy Gaps
In 2000 the Children's Internet Protection Act (CIPA) was signed into law. The act requires K-12 schools and libraries adopt and implement an internet specific safety policy. These policies address access by minors to inappropriate matter on the internet and instruct the safety and security of minors when using electronic mail, chat rooms, and other forms of direct electronic communications, unauthorized access, and other unlawful activities by minors online. It strictly monitors unauthorized disclosure, utilization, and distribution of personal information regarding minors and restricts minors' access to materials deemed harmful to the child (CIPA, 2013). Additionally, CIPA provides provisions to schools and libraries to install blocking software that prevents access to obscene or pornographic pictures. Although CIPA allows the filtering to be disabled upon the request of an adult, it enforces a policy to monitor the online activities of minors (CIPA, 2013).
Though there is overlap between the enactments of ASFA, CAPTA and CIPA in terms of broadening the scope of child welfare to include technology drivers, there is a gap. Namely, while CIPA provides protection in school and library settings to the child, it does not protect the child in their home, nor does it extend those safeguarding protocols be employed by the parent (CIPA, 2013). The benefits of child welfare policy will be better realized one they are improved upon, integrated and gelled to include safety protocols like those provided within CIPA. 
Policy Alternative: Improvements and Agenda Setting
We should look at policy improvements to the Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act (1988) that place value on the mental health of the child and core family in the context of the home environment. Namely, parents and fostering parents may be encouraged to offer up transparency on their relationship with the internet and telecommunications. Explicitly, the history of search and content should be of readily available evidence to adoption and childcare protective agency in legitimizing the fitness of the parent during investigation circumstances. These findings may be utilized in reference to guidelines and standards set forth by existing child welfare policy and child protective services during investigations of child abuse.  
In extreme cases of abuse and neglect, for example, law enforcement agency may issue a ‘No Knock Warrant’ to relieve a child from his or her abuser. According to the Department of Justice, “Although officers need not take affirmative steps to make an independent re-verification of the circumstances already recognized by a magistrate in issuing a no-knock warrant, such a warrant does not entitle officers to disregard reliable information clearly negating the existence of exigent circumstances when they actually receive such information before execution of the warrant” (No-Knock Warrant, 2015). This is one of the many barriers of entry law enforcement and child protective services face while engaging perpetuators of child abuse. 
Moving forward, child welfare policy may better equip child protective services and law enforcement agency to combat crimes against children by insisting the legal protection of the human rights of the child. Solutions may place focus on the transparency of parental fitness. Even further, we should look towards enabling law enforcement and child protective services with the toolkits essentially to identifying and exterminating abuses. These policies will play a pivotal role on reviewing the practices of private internet entities and their reporting practices surrounding internet crime, hate crime, incident reporting, and the availability of records for user accounts who are suspected criminals, sex offenders, or otherwise under search warrant from a law enforcement agency.
Unintended Consequences: Potential Risks
Limitations to the second amendment, specifically freedom of the press and freedom of assembly may be afflicted unintentionally by addressing improvements to child welfare policy. Restrictions and consequences to both this and the first amendment and the protection of freedom of speech are met with historic retaliation. 
Additionally, should the subject of parental fitness falls under the scrutiny of law enforcement and child protective services, the practices for search and seizure become of significant importance in information gathering. This leads to further implications with the constitutional rights of the parent. Namely, those rights concerning privacy may be effected in the enactment of any improvements or modifications to child welfare acts such as ASFA and CAPTA. A search under fourth amendment, for example, may incur when a governmental employee or agent of the government violates an individual's reasonable expectation of privacy. Furthermore, the fourth amendment of the U.S. Constitution provides that “[t]he right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized. (No-Knock, 2015)” The goal of these provisions is to protect people’s right to privacy and freedom from unreasonable intrusions by the government. 
Compatibility With Social Work Ethics and Values
Based on clinical social work or social work practice on the micro-level, childcare and the welfare of the child is largely viewed as a complex intersectionality of the person and the ecosystem of the family. “This process is highly individualized and requires a great deal of buy in from individual level practitioners. However, schools of social work as well as agencies employing social workers can make a commitment to instilling the value of lifelong learning to encourage the ongoing work necessary to develop a critically conscious approach to social work” (Yang, 2016, p. 519).
Furthermore, as reiterated by Yang, “It is note-worthy that social work educators have already expressed commitment for this idea in their support for addressing power, promoting lifelong learning, and encouraging the use of evidence and research in practice” (Yang, 2016, p. 519). The scope of the promotion of lifelong learning is intrinsically connected to social work and its capacity to curate public policy that favor the protection of the child in a rapidly evolving society. 
Funding & Engagement Strategy
A funding strategy is required to strive for improvements to ASFA and CAPTA. There are currently social change activists engaging in policy reform regarding internet safety. THORN is a nonprofit organization that works with law enforcement in unearthing child trafficking practices with via the utilization of disruptive technology and law enforcement agency (Thorn Digital Defenders of Children, 2019). Hopefully, the common vision for child safety and human rights of the child will gel coalitions like THORN and social change agents in bootstrapping the resources needed for change. 
Mental healthcare lobbyists, law enforcement and child protective services are some of the major touchpoints needed to engage policy revisions and improvements to existing child safety acts ASFA and CAPTA. These groups must coordinate with online moderators, existing internet safety advocates like THORN and programs that enforce the rights of the child and acknowledge the potential dangers of internet use (CIPA, 2013).
Potential Opposition to Policy Improvements
There are misconceptions that place the weight of investigations on households of low economic or low-income status. “Although there is a correlation between poverty and maltreatment, this does not mean that poverty causes maltreatment” (Yang, 2016). Studies that seek to unearth factors that contribute to a child’s mental well-being may dismantle the types of systemic notions that weigh higher income families as better fit for the care of a child than those parents who earn less or live without certain luxuries. Oftentimes parents of disproportionate socio-economic status are treated differently in our justice system. These systemic oppressions often undermine the safety of the child. We must revise our child welfare policies to address these gaps. 
While societally, we strive to prepare children for success, we must continue to align child welfare with policies that acknowledge the child as a human being with self-determination. Policies concerning the Child Welfare Act and modifications to accommodate for the evolving means of childcare will be met with stagnation. The already over-burdened adoption and foster care networks must be informed of data regarding the correlation of parental fitness and abusive behavior(s) as these statistics become available so that they may best drive the determinants into their own policies and procedures. This will be a long process and involve much opposition. Only upon unearthing variables that impact not only the physical well being but also the emotional and psychological well being of the child, do we begin as social policy advocates to advocate for the rights of the child.  
There is hope for improvements in the investigations process and shaping policy to further protect the child. For example, in November 2009, NASW submitted testimony to the House of Representatives demanding the reauthorization of full funding of CAPTA to allow for the implementation of effective prevention strategies. Additionally, NASW testimony stressed the necessity for more ‘culturally appropriate services and initiatives’ to improve and maintain professional child welfare workers (Child Welfare, 2008). Strives like these may pave success stories in the arena of monitoring the mental health of the child and, by proxy, allow for investigations like those mentioned in this policy review to become a strategic instrument for identifying and preventing child abuse.  
Policy and Human Rights Supporting Human Rights Through Policy Improvements 
Structural discrimination and freedom of choice are two of the many implications that internet usage has on human rights. For example, “Native American groups, as well as other minority groups, are also concerned about the “digital divide,” the disparity in access to computers and the internet between majority and minority groups” (Chapin, 2017, p. 314). Concerns like this place central focus on human rights issues as they extend to children. Article 26 of the UDHR expresses the human right to education. Whereas, “education shall be free, at least in the elementary and fundamental stages. Elementary education shall be compulsory. Technical and professional education shall be made generally available and higher education shall be equally accessible to all on the basis of merit” (Wallace, 2013). Child welfare policy places direct interest upon childhood education. This intersects with the educational pursuits of their parents as well. As our society becomes increasingly technologically driven, it is imperative that policies improve to reflect the educational standards equipped and influenced by technology. 
Article 3 of the UDHR expresses the 	human right to life, liberty, and personal security. Whereas the child is a human, his or her right to life and personal security of life is of upmost importance for policy framework and the enforcement of child welfare policy (UDHR, 1948). Article 5 addresses the human right of freedom from torture and degrading treatment (UDHR, 1948). Namely, “No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment” (UDHR, 1948; Wallace, 2013). The child, as product of the context of the family and the institutions in which the family intersect, is bound to experience human rights violations by abuses within those systems. Continuous improvements and integrations to child welfare policies like ASFA, CAPTA and CIPA help to ensure their human rights are better protected. 
 
References
Adoption and Safe Families Act of 1997. Retrieved from https://www.acf.hhs.gov/cb/resource/adoption-safe-families-act-1997 
Chapin, R. K. (2017). Social Policy for Effective Practice A Strengths Approach. Milton: Taylor and Francis.
The Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act (CAPTA). Retrieved from https://www.acf.hhs.gov/cb/resource/capta
Child Welfare Staff Training Model Culturally Responsive Child Welfare Practice With Latino Children and Families: A Child Welfare Staff Training Model. (2008, May). Retrieved from https://www.childwelfare.gov/topics/management/funding/funding-sources/federal-funding/cb-funding/cbreports/hispanic/latino/
(2003). Childrens Internet Protection Act, Pub. L. 106-554: study of technology protection measures in Section 1703: report to Congress. Washington, D.C.: Dept. of Commerce, National Telecommunications and Information Administration.
Children's Internet Protection Act (CIPA). (2019, June 12). Retrieved from https://www.fcc.gov/consumers/guides/childrens-internet-protection-act
Cooper, S. (2005). Medical, legal & social science aspects of child sexual exploitation: a comprehensive review of pornography, prostitution, and internet crimes. St. Louis, MO: G.W. Medical Pub.
Defending Children From Sexual Abuse: About Thorn. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.thorn.org/about-our-fight-against-sexual-exploitation-of-children/
Digital. (2018, June 7). Internet Safety Strategy green paper. Retrieved from https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/internet-safety-strategy-green-paper
Digital. (2018, May 19). New laws to make social media safer. Retrieved from https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-laws-to-make-social-media-safer
Senator Ervin, "No-Knock" Warrants, and the Fight to Stop Cops from Smashing into Homes the Way Burglars Do. Retrieved from https://www.aclu.org/blog/national-security/senator-ervin-no-knock-warrants-and-fight-stop-cops-smashing-homes-way
Fourth Amendment. Retrieved from https://www.law.cornell.edu/constitution/fourth_amendment
Home - Child Welfare Information Gateway. Retrieved from http://www.childwelfare.gov/
Internet Safety 101: Dangers. Retrieved from https://internetsafety101.org/snsdangers
(2015). No-Knock Warrant. The Encyclopedia of Civil Liberties in America, 667–668. doi: 10.4324/9781315699868-474
Rosen, L. N., & Etlin, M. (1996). The hostage child: sex abuse allegations in custody disputes. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Spotlight: Human Trafficking Intelligence and Leads. Retrieved from https://www.thorn.org/spotlight/
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Office of Population Affairs. Retrieved from http://www.hhs.gov/ash/oah
Wallace, R. M. M., Janeczko, F., & Wylie, K. (2013). International law. London: Sweet & Maxwell/Thomson Reuters.
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. (1948, December). Retrieved from https://www.un.org/en/universal-declaration-human-rights/
Yang, D.-O. (2012). Effects of Exposure to Pornography on Male Aggressive Behavioral Tendencies. The Open Psychology Journal, 5(1), 1–10. doi: 10.2174/1874350101205010001
Yang, J. L., & Ortega, D. (2016). Bureaucratic Neglect and Oppression in Child Welfare: Historical Precedent and Implications for Current Practice. Child and Adolescent Social Work Journal, 33(6), 513–521. doi: 10.1007/s10560-016-0446-4
/>>

